Iran is threatening retaliation
following a suspected Israeli air strike
in Syria the attack which flattened a
building in the capital Damascus killed
five members of Tan's paramilitary
revolutionary guard Iran's president
accuses Israel of spreading instability
in the region and says the attack will
not be left
unanswered Israel has not claimed
responsibility but the strike comes just
days after Iran struck what it called an
Israeli spy headquarters in Northern
Iraq
and the US military says several of its
troops were injured in another attack on
an air base in Western Iraq us Central
Command says iran-backed militants
launched multiple missiles and Rockets
at the al-asad airbase a us-led
coalition facility it says most of the
projectiles were intercepted but some
struck the facility the US says its
troops St stationed in Iraq and Syria
have faced more than 140 attacks by tan
Allied Fighters since the start of the
Israel hamus war in
October Christen hellberg Middle East
expert joins me now from Berlin uh
Christian would you characterize this as
a harmful but limited tit fortat or the
start of a regional war that many feared
could very well
happen well actually we are seeing that
this war in Gaza has been spilling over
as it is an old conflict that has been
going on for decades between Israel and
its so-called access of resistance on
one side and Iran and its so-called
access of resistance on one side and
Israel and the US on the other side so
what has happened after October 7th is
that as Hamas considers itself to be a
member of this AIS of resistance every
other militia would jump in trying to
help and step up pressure in Israel so
this is what has been happening in
southern Lebanon by hisbah we have seen
this with the houthi militia that are
attacking naval ships in the Red Sea and
we have been seeing this uh looking at
the Iranian back militias in Iraq and
Syria that have been attacking US troops
in Northern Iraq and Northeast Syria and
have tried to attack Israeli targets so
everybody's trying to portray it himself
as a strong supporter of the Palestinian
cause while at the same time they are
trying to avoid a full-blown War it's
more an exchange of Fire
portraying oneself as being determined
uh without getting into a direct direct
confrontation between Israel and Iran or
even the US and Iran and just so our
viewers can have some levels of
understanding here and Nuance uh let's
focus on Syria for a moment why are
members of the Iranian uh mil
revolutionary guard in Syria in the
first
place Iran is a long-standing Ally of
the Syrian regime and we should not
forget that it was Iranian militias on
the ground that together with the
Russian Air Force helped to save Bashar
Al Assad I mean they kept him in power
so Iran used the last few years to build
up a military presence in Syria which is
something that Israel considers to be an
existential threat because Syria and
Israel are sharing a border the Golan
Heights the Golan Heights are occupied
by Israel so Syria and Israel are in a
war in a state of War officially so this
is why Israel has continuously attacked
Iranian targets inside Syria which were
usually military facilities the airport
of Damascus the airport in Aleppo um
transportation because all the weapons
that are going to hisbah in Lebanon has
to cross through Syria but this attack
that we've seen in the middle of
Damascus is a definite escalation
because it is in the middle of a
neighborhood within Damascus the
presidential Palace is close by so it is
another step of escalating this war Iran
blames Israel for the attack How likely
is
that Israel has a long history of
targeted killings in the region they
have been stepping up this strategy
during the last few months they have
killed his Bola commanders Hamas
commanders in Lebanon and in Syria so I
don't think anybody has a doubt although
the Israeli leadership never officially
claims responsibility to not put their
allies in the west into trouble but I
think nobody has a doubt here and Israel
wants to send a clear message that every
Hamas and hisbah Commander or Iranian
revolutionary Guard general is not safe
wherever they are and they cannot get
hold on the Hamas leadership within Gaza
so they are try trying maybe to send
this strong message outside uh to go
after these kind of leaders in the
neighboring countries Christian no doubt
this is a delicate potentially dangerous
Dynamic what's likely to happen
next
Iran has to reate because it's a message
of Saving Face basically internally and
externally so they will do this
indirectly as we have seen before uh
there might be attacks from Syrian soil
by Iranian militias towards Israel from
the Golan Heights there might be other
attacks and we have just seen one on US
troops in Northern Iraq and Northeast
Syria which has been happening
continuously there might be direct
missile attacks from Iranian soil
against Israeli and US targets but all
these attacks have been very limited in
their damage so it's more a symbolic
meaning it's a sending of messages
saying that we are ready to react we are
able to react in case you want to
escalate any further but I don't see a
strong interest neither by Iran nor by
Israel or the US to get into a fullblown
regional War at this time the only group
that would be interested is Hamas but we
have seen at the same time that all
these attacks are limited so that they
will not cause a major or at least
direct confrontation Iran wants to build
up its nuclear potential before getting
into this direct confrontation and they
have not finished so far that's a Middle
East expert chrisen Helberg many many
thanks for your
insights thanks to you and to try to
understand all this uh let's welcome
amnon Iran a professor of international
politics of the Middle East at City
University of London C we have air
strikes in Iraq Syria which we just
mentioned but also Lebanon and Yemen
recently is there a risk of a regional
War do you
think I think there is certainly a risk
for a regional War uh at this point we
we're seeing that most of the players
involved Iran Israel the United States
Iran's proxies hisbah and the hthis are
trying to keep the conflict uh
underneath the threshold of a full-blown
War however if we look at the trajectory
over the last month we've seen that um
the conflict has inched closer to a
regional War than backing away from it
so we're not there yet but the danger is
considerable and there's a been a split
as you know better than I between Israel
United States on the future of Gaza and
the two-state solution with Joe Biden
and uh prime minister Netanyahu not
seeing eye to eye at all is that
disagreement um feeding into the overall
Regional tension
somehow
I'm not sure it's feeding into the
regional tension at the moment but
certainly uh it is a major flasho
between the United States uh and Israel
and it is uh definitely making it more
difficult for Israel to achieve uh its
War goals despite the use of really uh
devastating military force uh by Israel
uh very very large amounts of ammunition
and so on uh it is difficult to see what
strategic goals the Israelis have
achieved so far and there is growing
critic ISM within Israel that without a
Clear Vision for the day after as it is
called there um it will be difficult to
translate the military maneuver into uh
successful political aims certainly the
ones that were self-proclaimed by the
Israeli War cabinet and what space is
there left for diplomacy now it feels
like things have have gotten very
military and tit fortat and and
escalating yes I think there is still uh
room for diplomacy the United States and
France are trying to find some kind of
resolution for the ongoing skirmishes on
the Israeli Lebanese border some sort of
deal which will involve Israel and
hisbah uh finding uh some Middle Ground
uh and hisbah forces being withdrawn to
the uh to an agreed Point North of the
Israeli border and Israel uh in return
agreeing to some sort of concessions on
the Israeli Lebanese border but so far
there hasn't been a breakthrough and
moreover the Israeli
are entrenched in their position hisbah
has rejected so far the American and
French proposals and the Israeli
government is under growing mounting
internal pressure to enable 880,000 of
its citizens which have been effectively
evacuated from the northern border to
return to their homes but an agreement
with hisbah that is impossible from a
security point of view so everybody's
entrenched uh everybody I think is
looking for who will uh if you like
Flinch first the there is still some
room for FY but the space is being
reduced understood and thank you for
that Insight andon Aran a professor of
international politics of the Middle
East joining us from
London